Added "Restart Grafana" topic. (#30844)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/installation/restart-grafana.md

+++
title = "Restart Grafana"

> description = "Installation guide for Grafana"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description = "Instructions for restarting Grafana"
```

Author: Done

keywords = ["grafana", "restart", "documentation"]
weight = 750
+++

# Restart Grafana

Users often need to restart the Grafana service after they have made configuration changes. This topic provides detailed instructions on how to restart the service on supported operating systems.

- [Windows](#windows)
- [MacOS](#macos)

> - [Linux](linux)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Linux](#linux)
```

- [Docker](#docker)

## Windows

To restart Grafana:

1. Open the Services app.

> 2. Right-click on the **Grafana** service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Right-click on the **Grafana** service.
```

Reviewer 2: In my Windows 10 VM appears as `grafana-server.exe` so I think that it can confuse the users.

Author: @oddlittlebird and @papagian, what should be the instruction then? LMK so I can update the doc. TY.

Reviewer: In my non-VM Windows, it is just "Grafana." I think we can have a little faith in our users here that they can figure out that grafana-server.exe is the Grafana service.

> 3. In the context menu, click **Restart**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the context menu, click **Restart**.
```

Author: Fixed.

> ## macOS

Author: Done.

> To restart Grafana, go to the directory where you copied the install setup files. Then run the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To restart Grafana:

1. Navigate to the directory where you copied the installation setup files.
1. Then run the following command:
```

Reviewer: Do you need to navigate there in the UI or a terminal window?

Where do you enter the command?

Author: Yes, updated doc.

```bash
./bin/grafana-server web
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Linux

> These instructions are applicable for restarting Grafana installed on Debian or Ubuntu, as well as on the RPM-based Linux systems (CentOS, Fedora, OpenSuse, Red Hat).

Reviewer: Restart methods differ depending on whether your Linux system uses systemd or init.d.

Author: Done.

### Restart the server with systemd

To restart the service and verify that the service has started, run the following commands:

```bash
sudo systemctl restart grafana-server
sudo systemctl status grafana-server
```

Alternately, you can configure the Grafana server to restart at boot:

```bash
sudo systemctl enable grafana-server.service
```

> **Note:** SUSE or OpenSUSE users may need to start the server with the systemd method, then use the init.d method to configure Grafana to start at boot.

### Restart the server with init.d

To restart the service, run the following command:

`sudo service grafana-server restart`

or

`sudo /etc/init.d/grafana-server restart`

Verify the status:

`sudo service grafana-server status`

or

`sudo /etc/init.d/grafana-server status`

Alternately, you can configure the Grafana server to restart at boot:

```bash
sudo update-rc.d grafana-server defaults
```
## Docker

To restart the Grafana service, use the `docker run` command. For example:

> `docker run -d -p 3000:3000 --name grafana grafana/grafana:latest`

Reviewer 2: This will try to start a new container named `grafana` and would fail because there is already a container named `grafana` running:
`docker: Error response from daemon: Conflict. The container name "/grafana" is already in use by container "78d6ac82a85d894d2f1fa230319951f28a15c4ff922f53be8b0e3dc428aed8af". You have to remove (or rename) that container to be able to reuse that name.
See 'docker run --help'.`

So for restarting the existing container users can do:
`docker restart grafana`

Author: Thank you!

> This will restart the Grafana service and run it in the background.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This restarts the Grafana service and runs it in the background.
```

Alternately, you can use the `docker compose` command to restart Grafana. For more information, refer to [docker compose documentation](https://docs.docker.com/compose/).

> ### An example of using docker compose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Docker compose example
```

Author: Done.

Configure your `docker-compose.yml` file. For example:

```bash
grafana:
  image: grafana/grafana:latest
  ports:
    - "3000:3000"
  environment:
    - TERM=linux
    - GF_INSTALL_PLUGINS=grafana-clock-panel,grafana-piechart-panel,grafana-polystat-panel
```
Run the command:

`docker-compose up`

> Grafana along with the three plugins specified in the YAML file are up and running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Docker compose starts Grafana and the three plugins specified in the YAML file.
```

Reviewer: The Docker compose example confuses me. It reads like we are starting the server, but this topic is about restarting Grafana.

Reviewer 2: Maybe that's the missing part: after starting grafana for first time using `docker-compose up`, the running container can be restarted using:
`docker-compose restart grafana`

Author: Great tip, thank you @papagian. I will update the doc.
